RFCLOCK IMPLEMENTATION

August 20, 2020

1    RFCLOCK LEADER

The RFClock leader design, consists of following design components; i) a reference oscillator
(e.g 10 MHz) distributes clock signal to controller and radio elements to enable RF carrier
formation  to  generate  synchronous  two-tone  signal,  UWB  carrier  signal,  and  system-level
operations  (ADC-DAC  sampling),  ii)  a  RF  frequency  synthesizer  ADF4350  locks  to  refer-
ence oscillator to produce two-tone signal at desired frequency, f₁ + f₂ that can be adjusted
during the operation according to channel conditions,  iii) a RF power combiner and a RF
power amplifier is used to combine two-tone signal and transmit over-the-air at a particular
transmission power, iv) a DECAWAVE DW1000 UWB radio IC is responsible of transmis-
sion  and  reception  of  UWB  carrier  impulse  with  recorded  timestamps,  and  v)  a  
controller unit, nRF52832, orchestrates all operations including selection of two-tone frequency for the
followers  to  extract  reference  clock  signal  and  coordinates  with  DW1000  for  transmission
and reception of UWB packets to help the followers estimate and compensate for time offset.

1.1     RFClock  Follower

RFClock follower design consists of following design units;  i) RFClock front-end,  ii) clock-
edge alignment, iii) PPS generation and iv) phase/time estimation.

RF  front-end:  Our front-end design consists of passive components such as resistors, ca-
pacitors and diode and hence is ultra-low power in nature with reasonably high sensitivities.
By choosing the appropriate values for these components with envelope filter, we remove the
quadrature signal,  ᶠ1+f2 , and leave only the amplitude of the signal.  First, we use adjustable
impedance  matching  filter  to  tune  system  frequency  to  the  desired  frequency  to  minimize
reflected energy in matching antenna to the trunk of the rectifier.  We use wiSpry WS1040
digital capacitor array as tunable capacitors to implement re-configurable functionality.  The
impedance matching network is controlled via a serial interface of main controller.  Having a
tunable matching filter makes the system more flexible in the sense that the reference clock
can be extracted from any two-tone signal excited at the band of interest.  Then, we use the
4  stage  rectifier  to  design  our  envelope  detector  circuit.   The  rectifier  consists  of  
Schottky diodes HSMS285C which have faster switching time compared to traditional diodes and the
least possible turn-on threshold voltage.  Last, the extracted clock signal pass through band
pass filter with center frequency at 10MHz.

Clock-edge  alignment  with  PPS:  The  output  of  this  unit  is  1PPS  signal  along  with
phase-locked  10  MHz  clock,  synchronized  across  the  entire  network  of  the  followers.   
The extracted clock output is connected to Si5346, a low jitter frequency synthesizer from Silicon
Lab.   The  frequency  synthesizer  feeds  STOP  input  of  TDC7200  from  Texas  Instruments.
Another output of PLL is connected to PIC12F683 as clock input, to produce 1 PPS signal.
The phase difference between 10 MHz and local PPS measured using TDC is used in phase
estimation.   The  controller  orchestrates  sub-components  of  clock-edge  alignment  hardware
using SPI. The main function applies simultaneous phase measurement to delay chain in order
to  synchronize  clock  edges  with  global  PPS.  The  delay  chain  consist  of  cascaded  
multiple timing  element  DS1023  that  allows  clock  signals  to  be  delayed  by  up  to  more  than  a  
full period (i.e., 100ns).  The system is designed in a feedback loop architecture that aligns the
clock signals by adjusting the delay element based on the output of phase/time estimation
unit.

Phase/Time  Estimation:  This  unit  consist  of  Decawave  DW1000  ultra-wideband  radio
that is capable of time-stamping the transmission and reception of packets with a resolution
of 15.65ps.  DW1000 is interfaced with nRF52832, cortex-M based micro-controller via SPI
which directs the ranging process and estimates ∆TP P S.  Followed by the estimation of phase
offset, DW1000 generates an interrupt to reset the local PPS of the follower at the SYNC pin
of the PIC processor according to ∆φ.  DW1000 is provided with a clock signal of frequency
38.4  MHz  and  is  upconverted  to  system  clock  frequency  given  as  125  MHz  by  clock  PLL
(CLKPLL), an approximation to the actual system clock of 124.8MHz.  This system clock
is further upconverted to 63.8976GHz sampling clock which is associated with ranging.  The
timestamp  counter  operates  at  this  sampling  clock  and  increments  every  15.65ps  which  is
an approximation to the period of this clock.  Since the hardware delay associated with the
PPS module causes large offsets (millisecond level) between local PPS of the followers, these
clock approximations causes cumulative errors in interrupt generation, which are estimated
and  removed  iteratively  over  concurrent  ranging.  Additionally,  there  is  a  phase  ambiguity
of less than 26ns between 38.4 MHz and PPS at the follower which is estimated using TDC
and compensated during phase estimation.  Consequently, the controller sends the estimated
phase offset to the delay chain which consist of delay line- DS1023, incrementing with a step
size of 0.25ns, cascaded together to increase the maximum configurable delay.  Since shifting
in time domain is equivalent to phase shift in frequency domain,  delay module adds delay
to the clock signal depending on the 16-bit value latched by the host controller over SPI.

Fabrication  and  Power  Consumption:  We implemented our design on a 4-layer FR-4
PCB using standard commercial components.  For ease of testing and debugging, the board
consists  of  man  output/input  ports  and  test  points.   The  final  size  of  RFClock  is  
13cm x 7.5cm and the total weight is 35g.  It is ready to plug in any SDR radio allowing external
clock input/PPS. We use two antenna for RF and UWB signal which are Ettus VERT900
and  Decawave  UWB,  respectively.   Our  platform  can  use  the  UWB  permissible  channels
spanning from 3.5GHz (with 500MHz bandwidth) to 6.5GHz.  In most of the experiments,
we use 3.5GHz as the center frequency for improved range and reduce power consumption.
Power  consumption  of  front-end  design  is  6.6W.  The  main  power  consuming  unit  of  the
follower design is phase/time estimation due to radio chip.  To minimize power consumption
of  UWB  radio,  we  use  a  preamble  length  of  128  with  highest  data  rate  of  6.81Mpbs  to
reduce  transmission  and  reception  times.   As  a  result  of  using  this  configuration  the  
total frame transmission time is about 180 s, and the reception time is about 215 s, respectively.
The time spent in idle state is around 1100 us since it depends on SPI speed which is 8 MHZ
for nRF52832. Therefore, consuming energy for one ranging operation is 0.159J, very low
power.




